# Notes 24 February, 2021

### Topic: The Role of Authorship** ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oanQWbP_yg9UkLSI9OrNwSxST0K5mkgXvNiymz4ixqw/edit?usp=sharing))

**Volunteers to take notes: Please add your name below**

- Leontien
- Malvika

**Participants (write your names below)**

*Name / Institute*

- Federico Nanni, The Alan Turing Institute
- Leontien Talboom, UCL & The National Archives UK
- Malvika Sharan, The Turing Way - Turing Institute
- Katie McDonough, The Alan Turing Institute
- Emma Karoune, The Alan Turing Institute
- David Beavan, The Alan Turing Institute
- Ismael Kherroubi Garcia, The Alan Turing Institute
- Jez Cope, The British Library
- Glenn, The Alan Turing Institute
- Jenny Bunn, The National Archives
- John Moore (The National Archives)
- Alessandro Tirapani
- Isil Bilgin (University of Reading, Brainhack Global Organization Committee)
- Kaspar Beelen, The Alan Turing Institute
- Bernard Ogden
- Serge Sharoff, University of Leeds University of Leeds
- Becca Hutcheon
- James Smithies, King's Digital Lab, Kings College London
- Rossitza Atanassova, The British Library

### :dart: Quick Question

*Feel free to answer or add a '+1' next to a statement that you agree with and/or would like to discuss*
**Is authorship a topic you discuss openly with your colleagues / group? Or is it something that comes out only at the very end of a project (when you’re about to submit a paper for instance)?**

*Name / response*

- Jenny - Coming from the perspective of being an archivist we have been reluctant to claim ownership of our work (e.g. in the form of a catalogue). We operate in a different framework around recognition - For many years it has been seen as important that we are invisible, neutral in the process, but this is increasingly being questioned. +1 DB:neutrality I suspect is a myth, the catalog is a reflection of individuals, and certianly society at time of writing/editing. JB - Exactly this is what is being recognised and some are calling for colophons to be added - a sort of positionality statement for archivists.
* Emma - single author still fairly common in my field, archaeology but I am speaking about this a lot at the moment with The Turing Way - discussing how many authors and contributions can be captured or attributed fairly, how to record collaborative projects etc.
- Ismael - Yes, with those I discuss philosophy of science with; not with the people I am currently preparing a conference paper with. Hmmm, may have caught myself there.
* Malvika: Yes, but because I am not currently in a job that sits in a traditional academic system. It is quite important in open source community as a lot of work stay hidden and we would like them to receive acknowledgement.
* 
* Isil: I guess the authorship agreement highly differs between the fields, even countries depends on the apriori accepted settings regarding the order, who should be there, and so on. This seems like a challenge in many aspects to break when it becomes a backboned struture especially when you are an ECR. Here is the question how to decide which contribution worth more than the other or how to quantify them given we all are working under public fundings which outputs and benefits of the research more important than these discussions to focus.
* James: We're taking a more ad hoc approach than we'd like in King's Digital Lab, due to other priorities. It's something we're starting to consider now, but on a case by case basis. We are running a 'Research Collaboration Framework pilot' that defines RSE research involvement in the pre-grant stage, and defines high level authorship / attribution expectations, but doesn't get down to the specifics of attribtuion in articles. In general, King's DH has long  assumed a 'movie credits' approach to attribution on websites, but we do have work to do with other kinds of outputs. It would actually be useful to have someone other than me here, given I'm lab director and it's really an issue for the RSE team to decide (in my opinion).
* [name=Jez] Mostly discuss this as part of the writing process myself; very interested in recording the different roles in metadata, see e.g. [CASRAI Contributor Roles Taxonomy (CRediT)](https://casrai.org/credit/)
* Yes,  and it gets amplified when there may be different linked outputs, e.g. papers and code. Getting agreement over who are authors, who are contributors who are acknowledged is always hard +1 [name=Glenn]
* Alessandro: in social sciences, it is uncommon to have more than 3 authors. Most papers that are not single authored have quite clear rules. The person who did most work/had the idea/collected data is the first author, and the others are listed depending on contribution. At times a new author is added in the review process, and it would normally go last. So I think there is not much debate beforehand, but it can be discussed when more than one person collects  data or does substaintial work along the way.  In few cases, you can see a * saying 'All authors contributed equally'. 



### ✍ Initial Drafted Notes

*anyone can help taking notes.*
<!-- All things discussed during the meeting can be entered here. -->

First discussion talked about the contribution of code, how does this work? Github holds a history of who has worked on the code, but what if you move it? 

Jenny talks about being the 'invisible labour' of doing archival work and that archivists are complicit with that as they perceive themselves as neutral. This question has come up more now that there is more recognition for preprocessing datasets within academia. But archivists do not get recognized in the same way that someone who may be doing this preprocessing.

At King's Digital Lab they are looking at different ways that people may be recognised for their research contribution. They are able to choose between three options, 
co-investigator, research services or undertaking a project and getting recognition for it.

Other invisible work is done by for example students, who may not be recognised for the tedious work in projects. Jenny also talks about participants in this setting and that it is also about understanding when recognition is important.

Alessandro talks about how in social sciences the position is almost irrelevant. It doesn't really matter as much, whereas in other fields it matter quite a lot. 

Fede then mentions how he would like to discuss the interdisplinary work and publishing this. And what do you do? Do you publish in a highly prestigous interdisciplinary journal? Or do you publish in two different journals? What is the best way of doing this? 

Fede also asks if code is something that is seen as more general across disciplines? David did say that it is not, they are different ways of coding and different ideas of good code.

Ismael asks if people really are seeking recognition and Jenny talks about how there are different levels of recognition, also there is a difference between people who want the recognition and people who need the recognition.

Isil talks about how every contribution is important. Creating a mindset and a community where any contribution is a contribution is important. 

### :books: Reference and other works mentioned during the discussion

*Please add link and reference, any work that has been discussed and mentioned*

- [CASRAI Contributor Roles Taxonomy (CRediT)](https://casrai.org/credit/)
- [The Turing Way](https://the-turing-way.netlify.app) - a guide to reproducible data science that will support students and academics as they develop their code, with the aim of helping them produce work that will be regarded as gold-standard examples of trustworthy and reusable research. 
  - [Communicating Open Science](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/issues/1733)
